# Developer README #

This file is intended to provide a place for developers and contributors to
document what other developers need to know about changes made to Puppet.

# Use of RVM considered dangerous #

Use of RVM in production situations, e.g. running CI tests against this
repository, is considered dangerous.  The reason we consider RVM to be
dangerous is because the default behavior of RVM is to hijack the builtin
behavior of the shell, causing Gemfile files to be loaded and evaluated when
the shell changes directories into the project root.

This behavior causes the CI Job execution environment that runs with `set -e`
to be incompatible with RVM.

We work around this issue by disabling the per-project RC file parsing using

    if ! grep -qx rvm_project_rvmrc=0 ~/.rvmrc; then
      echo rvm_project_rvmrc=0 >> ~/.rvmrc
    fi

When we setup CI nodes, but this is not standard or expected behavior.

Please consider rbenv instead of rvm.  The default behavior of rvm is difficult
to maintain with `set -e` shell environments.

# Dependencies #

Puppet is considered an Application as it relates to the recommendation of
adding a Gemfile.lock file to the repository and the information published at
[Clarifying the Roles of the .gemspec and
Gemfile](http://yehudakatz.com/2010/12/16/clarifying-the-roles-of-the-gemspec-and-gemfile/)

To install the dependencies run: `bundle install` to install the dependencies.

A checkout of the source repository should be used in a way that provides
puppet as a gem rather than a simple Ruby library.  The parent directory should
be set along the `GEM_PATH`, preferably before other tools such as RVM that
manage gemsets using `GEM_PATH`.

For example, Puppet checked out into `/workspace/src/puppet` using `git
checkout https://github.com/puppetlabs/puppet` in `/workspace/src` can be used
with the following actions.  The trick is to symlink `gems` to `src`.

    $ cd /workspace
    $ ln -s src gems
    $ mkdir specifications
    $ pushd specifications; ln -s ../gems/puppet/puppet.gemspec; popd
    $ export GEM_PATH="/workspace:${GEM_PATH}"
    $ gem list puppet

This should list out

    puppet (2.7.19)

## Bundler ##

With a source checkout of Puppet properly setup as a gem, dependencies can be
installed using [Bundler](http://gembundler.com/)

    $ bundle install
    Fetching gem metadata from http://rubygems.org/........
    Using diff-lcs (1.1.3)
    Installing facter (1.6.11)
    Using metaclass (0.0.1)
    Using mocha (0.10.5)
    Using puppet (2.7.19) from source at /workspace/puppet-2.7.x/src/puppet
    Using rack (1.4.1)
    Using rspec-core (2.10.1)
    Using rspec-expectations (2.10.0)
    Using rspec-mocks (2.10.1)
    Using rspec (2.10.0)
    Using bundler (1.1.5)
    Your bundle is complete! Use `bundle show [gemname]` to see where a bundled gem is installed.

# UTF-8 Handling #

As Ruby 1.9 becomes more commonly used with Puppet, developers should be aware
of major changes to the way Strings and Regexp objects are handled.
Specifically, every instance of these two classes will have an encoding
attribute determined in a number of ways.

 * If the source file has an encoding specified in the magic comment at the
   top, the instance will take on that encoding.
 * Otherwise, the encoding will be determined by the LC\_LANG or LANG
   environment variables.
 * Otherwise, the encoding will default to ASCII-8BIT

## References ##

Excellent information about the differences between encodings in Ruby 1.8 and
Ruby 1.9 is published in this blog series:
[Understanding M17n](http://links.puppetlabs.com/understanding_m17n)

## Encodings of Regexp and String instances ##

In general, please be aware that Ruby 1.9 regular expressions need to be
compatible with the encoding of a string being used to match them.  If they are
not compatible you can expect to receive and error such as:

    Encoding::CompatibilityError: incompatible encoding regexp match (ASCII-8BIT
    regexp with UTF-8 string)

In addition, some escape sequences were valid in Ruby 1.8 are no longer valid
in 1.9 if the regular expression is not marked as an ASCII-8BIT object.  You
may expect errors like this in this situation:

    SyntaxError: (irb):7: invalid multibyte escape: /\xFF/

This error is particularly common when serializing a string to other
representations like JSON or YAML.  To resolve the problem you can explicitly
mark the regular expression as ASCII-8BIT using the /n flag:

    "a" =~ /\342\230\203/n

Finally, any time you're thinking of a string as an array of bytes rather than
an array of characters, common when escaping a string, you should work with
everything in ASCII-8BIT.  Changing the encoding will not change the data
itself and allow the Regexp and the String to deal with bytes rather than
characters.

Puppet provides a monkey patch to String which returns an encoding suitable for
byte manipulations:

    # Example of how to escape non ASCII printable characters for YAML.
    >> snowman = "â˜ƒ"
    >> snowman.to_ascii8bit.gsub(/([\x80-\xFF])/n) { |x| "\\x#{x.unpack("C")[0].to_s(16)} }
    => "\\xe2\\x98\\x83"

If the Regexp is not marked as ASCII-8BIT using /n, then you can expect the
SyntaxError, invalid multibyte escape as mentioned above.

# Windows #

If you'd like to run Puppet from source on Windows platforms, the
include `ext/envpuppet.bat` will help.

To quickly run Puppet from source, assuming you already have Ruby installed
from [rubyinstaller.org](http://rubyinstaller.org).

    gem install sys-admin win32-process win32-dir win32-taskscheduler --no-rdoc --no-ri
    gem install win32-service --platform=mswin32 --no-rdoc --no-ri --version 0.7.1
    net use Z: "\\vmware-host\Shared Folders" /persistent:yes
    Z:
    cd <path_to_puppet>
    set PATH=%PATH%;Z:\<path_to_puppet>\ext
    envpuppet puppet --version
    2.7.9

Some spec tests are known to fail on Windows, e.g. no mount provider
on Windows, so use the following rspec exclude filter:

    cd <path_to_puppet>
    envpuppet rspec --tag ~fails_on_windows spec

This will give you a shared filesystem with your Mac and allow you to run
Puppet directly from source without using install.rb or copying files around.

## Common Issues ##

 * Don't assume file paths start with '/', as that is not a valid path on
   Windows.  Use Puppet::Util.absolute\_path? to validate that a path is fully
   qualified.

 * Use File.expand\_path('/tmp') in tests to generate a fully qualified path
   that is valid on POSIX and Windows.  In the latter case, the current working
   directory will be used to expand the path.

 * Always use binary mode when performing file I/O, unless you explicitly want
   Ruby to translate between unix and dos line endings.  For example, opening an
   executable file in text mode will almost certainly corrupt the resulting
   stream, as will occur when using:

     IO.open(path, 'r') { |f| ... }
     IO.read(path)

   If in doubt, specify binary mode explicitly:

     IO.open(path, 'rb')

 * Don't assume file paths are separated by ':'.  Use `File::PATH_SEPARATOR`
   instead, which is ':' on POSIX and ';' on Windows.

 * On Windows, `File::SEPARATOR` is '/', and `File::ALT_SEPARATOR` is '\'.  On
   POSIX systems, `File::ALT_SEPARATOR` is nil.  In general, use '/' as the
   separator as most Windows APIs, e.g. CreateFile, accept both types of
   separators.

 * Don't use waitpid/waitpid2 if you need the child process' exit code,
   as the child process may exit before it has a chance to open the
   child's HANDLE and retrieve its exit code.  Use Puppet::Util.execute.

 * Don't assume 'C' drive.  Use environment variables to look these up:

    "#{ENV['windir']}/system32/netsh.exe"

# Configuration Directory #

In Puppet 3.x we've simplified the behavior of selecting a configuration file
to load.  The intended behavior of reading `puppet.conf` is:

 1. Use the explicit configuration provided by --confdir or --config if present
 2. If running as root (`Puppet.features.root?`) then use the system
    `puppet.conf`
 3. Otherwise, use `~/.puppet/puppet.conf`.

When Puppet master is started from Rack, Puppet 3.x will read from
~/.puppet/puppet.conf by default.  This is intended behavior.  Rack
configurations should start Puppet master with an explicit configuration
directory using `ARGV << "--confdir" << "/etc/puppet"`.  Please see the
`ext/rack/files/config.ru` file for an up-to-date example.

# Determining the Puppet Version

If you need to programmatically work with the Puppet version, please use the
following:

    require 'puppet/version'
    # Get the version baked into the sourcecode:
    version = Puppet.version
    # Set the version (e.g. in a Rakefile based on `git describe`)
    Puppet.version = '2.3.4'

Please do not monkey patch the constant `Puppet::PUPPETVERSION` or obtain the
version using the constant.  The only supported way to set and get the Puppet
version is through the accessor methods.

EOF
